[NARRATOR] As the investigation
around this mummy continues,
the team digs deeper
into scientific examination.
We're actually
doing it right.
We have a healthy degree
of distrust of everybody
that's going on around us.
And we know we have to
follow the scientific method
to the very bottom
of our investigation.
We were soon joined by
Professor Korotkov
from St. Petersburg University.
And his expertise is in
bioenergy and forensics.
And we have a very
important mission here in Peru.
I came here because
it was a group of scientists,
professionals, and journalists.
[JAY] When he brought it out
and pulled it out of the box,
it was a stunned
silence at first.
It was a prepared mummy.
The size of this humanoid
was 168 centimeters.
So, it's practically my size.
So, it means that
this was a person
who was walking as we do,
who was able to move hands
as we have, with long legs.
So the proportion of the body
was very similar to ours.
The mummies are covered
completely in this white dust.
But this is not just white dust.
It is something that is
going to really dry the skin,
and the skin will be able to
survive for so many years.
[DR. KOROTKOV] When I was
able to clean this dust,
I see dark matter. Very dark.
[JAIME] I got really excited
when I realized that
under the white powder
was skin, real flesh.
And I knew then that we
had an organic creature.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
It has a head, neck, rib cage,
pelvic girdle, and limbs.
Then, inside the limbs,
something that draws
our attention.
The presence of two bones
in the forearm,
which would be the radius
and the ulna.
In the leg, it would be
the tibia and the fibula.
[DR. KOROTKOV] We were able
to see all vertebra.
And we calculated,
it was about 25 vertebrae.
Plus, we were able
to see ribs as well.
So it was a clear
anatomical structure.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
DNA will allow us to make
a biological correlation
of evolution toward
what species it belongs to
or how much similarity
it has with the human species.
As we continued to do
the full sequencing of DNA,
Professor Korotkov
and his team
have some interesting
first results.
Our professionals--
and it was one of the top level
professionals in Russia--
geneticists from
genetic laboratory,
they were able to extract DNA.
They confirmed that
this is female.
Because there was
only X strands.
And this female has
structure of the body,
practically exactly as the
structure of our human body.
Professor Korotkov's original
DNA testing determined
it was a female.
And once the team discovered
that it was a female,
they decided to give her a name,
and they named her Maria.
[SPEAKING RUSSIAN]
From the DNA samples of
the mummy now known as Maria,
we were able to identify
that this is a woman,
as the Y chrome is missing.
[SPEAKING RUSSIAN]
On tomograms, in the
posterior parts of the skull,
we saw something that was
less dense than the bone.
It is most likely the dehydrated
remnants of the brain.
In the chest cavity,
we traced the contours
of the heart chambers and
main branches of the lungs.
In the abdominal cavity,
we saw the contours
of the liver and spleen.
And in the pelvis,
were clearly visible the
contours of the intestines.
During the DNA extraction,
Professor Korotkov and his team
discovered the presence of
something else in the sample.
In the process of extracting,
they have to dilute it
from a very special liquid.
And they've told that this
liquid had a very strong smell.
The type of smell of some herbs.
So it tells us that in
the process of mummification,
this body was mummified with
a type of some herbal liquid.
[MELISSA] Archaeologists
like Daniel Merino
relate this kind of herbal smell
or concoction to ancient Egypt.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
Egyptian mummies also had
this type of embalming process
for bodies.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
What they were doing was trying
to avoid decomposition
of the body so they could enter
the afterlife more intact.
So, they looked for natural
methods like acrylic resin
with pigmentation
to be able to maintain the skin,
the organs, et cetera.
So, it is absolutely
clear that those mummies,
they were specially prepared.
It was not just
natural modification,
it was special preparation.
And the pose where-- how they
were sitting like this, again,
it's one more indication
for all of us.
[NARRATOR] Was this special
preparation created
by humans or non-humans?
Is it possible that this body
was mummified using practices
similar to ancient Egypt?
Coming up, a
musculoskeletal radiologist
notices something interesting.
The skull--
I don't see any suture lines.
There's no bones
that are separate in the skull.
They all appear fused.
So, this appears
to be a solid structure.
[NARRATOR] The samples
are in laboratories
in five different countries,
and full DNA sequencing
is in the process.
While the team waits
for the results,
there are other bodies
to investigate
from the same location.